Preparing for a faculty interview in academia
Recently I had some interviews for tenure-track positions, and I had a lot of good advice that helped me prepare.  There's already a lot of good advice out there in the web, but I thought I'd add my two-cents:

Writing the Research and Teaching Statement:
The first few drafts of my research statement read something like:  "I have done this and this and this, and I have plans to do this and that."

My improved draft of the research statement read more like:  "In my field, there is this big open question, which I addressed with this novel method or perspective, and unexpectedly found ___."
"In the future, my research will address this big open question.  This question is crucial because ____.  An example of the systems I would work in are ___."
This isn't exactly what I wrote, but you get the picture.  It is possible to sound exciting on paper!

The Phone Interview:
Be prepared for these types of questions:

What's your 5-year plan?
What would you write your first grant on?
When you retire, what do you want to be known for?
What kind of lab group do you want to have?  (mix of undergrads/ grads/ postdocs)
List some projects students in your lab might take on.
What's your teaching philosophy?  grads?  undergrads?
What courses would you like to teach?
What attracted you to this position?
How do you see yourself fitting into this department?
What are some of the challenges and benefits of being at this small/large institution?
What do you see as challenges to a new faculty member?
Where will you get your funding from?
How do you intend to get good students?
What is the impact of your research on society?
What is your best paper?

Ask them some basic questions that show you are serious about their program:

What are resources for grad students?
What does a typical grad student timeline look like?
Do you have this ___ equipment that I will need for my research?
What are resources for developing new courses? grant writing?


The In-Person Interview:
It is interesting to talk to people about their preparation.  Some people take a few weeks to prepare for an interview.  Some people read papers of all the people they are going to meet with.  In my case, I had about a week to prepare before my first interview, and I could not sleep that week.  I will admit that I downloaded pictures of the people I was going to meet with and memorized their names (because I am horrible with names), but I did not go out of my way to know that much about their research (someone told me that it can be creepy to talk to someone outside your field who knows all about you).
Some advice I got:
1)  Don't blow off the grad students---they can make or break it for you.
2)  The most relaxed candidate is almost always the one who is hired.
3)  Don't talk too much about your own research---show that you are interested in what they do and you will be a good colleague.
4)  Be prepared for more questions like the ones listed above.
5)  Bring your list of questions and paper, and don't be afraid to take notes.
6)  Getting to the interview means you are awesome.  After the interview, it's a total crapshoot that depends on department politics and fit.  It's best to forget it ever happened (like it's that simple...)

The chalk-talk
These are becoming more common, and they can go really awfully.  I presented my idea for the first grant I want to write---it stimulated discussion, and it also gave me the opportunity to see if they would give me critical feedback.  From others I have talked to, the most successful chalk-talks they have seen were ones in which the person presented an idea for an experiment.  I practiced in front of my friends (I also practiced the seminar too).

More specific questions to ask:

Questions for professors

What is your biggest frustration here?
What are the best features of a position here compared to other colleges or universities?
What kind of positions do grad students get after graduation?
Who decides on TA assignments and is there attempt to be fair?
Fellowships available from the university for grad students?
What are hiring priorities or what is the vision for the department?
Can you give me some examples of how you meet your teaching load?


Questions for grad students

What do you all do (and why are you interested in it)?
What do you want in a new person and what skills are lacking in the dept?
What kind of skills do you want to build that will allow you to excel in your field?
Would you be interested in a course/seminar in ___?



Questions for administrators

•What is the policy for:
–Tenure evaluation
•How is publication record evaluated for tenure?  I will be publishing several papers outside my field of marine biology
•Is there any prejudice against funding that does not come from NIH of NSF?
–Teaching load
–Benefits
–Sabbatical leave
–Service
•Lab space
–I plan to conduct a combination of lab work, field experiments, and  computer-intensive modeling. How much space could I expect for my lab computer  facilities, and
– how much to house my grad students?
– Shared equipment or space?
•Research support 
–Grants from university for preliminary/pilot data collection for grants to submit to NSF or NIH
–Machine shop
–IT support
–In house editors and graphic design
–Overhead rates
–Interdiscinplinary: has the department ever been involved in a multi-department training  grant proposal?
–
•Recruiting
–as a new faculty member would I get any  special help in either recruiting or admitting students ?
–Grad student stipend and # semesters, do grad students get benefits?
–Who decides on TA assignments?
•Teaching
–Support for development of innovative techniques in classroom
–Support for resources (GPS, field balances, syringes, etc)
–Opportunites to double up on some semesters
–Development of field courses
–  I am interested in using several computer labs in my course on  ______.  What sort of computer facilities are available for that type of instruction?

•awards supporting faculty and chairs in their teaching, research, and professional development.
•Is it a policy to be assigned a mentor until I get tenure?
•What is tenure success rate?
•If I wanted to teach an interdisciplinary course on ____, could I get  money to bring in 2-3 speakers in a semester who would address some of the themes of the course?

Other resources
1)  See Ecology 101 in the April 2006 Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America.  
2)  I also copied and pasted below what other people gave or sent me...

QUALMS AND QUESTIONS FOR AN ACADEMIC JOB INTERVIEW By Clyde F. Herreid II and Robert J. Full 
Introduction 
Thousands of Ph.D's are abruptly thrust into the academic marketplace each year. Most are ill prepared for the experience: they have never written a curriculum vitae or resume; they do not know how to give a seminar; they are not prepared to ask intelligent questions during an interview; and they do not know what to look for in a job. They have spent perhaps five years in graduate school and another couple in postdoctoral training aiming for this moment -- learning research and teaching skills -- yet they have no earthly idea how to get employed. The faculty have not prepared them for this critical step; this benign neglect is a holdover from the days when academic appointments were plentiful or from a time when job-grubbing details were considered beneath the dignity of professionals. The time is past for such ennui. 
To offset some of the uncertainty and pain of the job interview ? a process which usually involves one or two days and offers innumerable occasions to say and do regrettable things -- we offer a checklist of questions to ask. Some queries are more appropriate for the chairperson and other administrators (if you get an opportunity to see them), others are better asked of faculty or students. Of course, many questions will be answered without you openly posing them at all; information will naturally flow as you linger over a coffee or beer. Other information can be gathered before going on the interview as you browse through a catalogue of the prospective school, or ask your acquaintances about the place, or look up the publications of your potential colleagues. However, let us emphasize this point, many questions should be asked of more than one person. People do not always have the same perspective. A chairperson may think everything is fine (or he will not elaborate on a problem, especially if he wants to sell you on the department). A faculty member, on the other hand, may think the place is in a turmoil, and a student may think the department is the pits. Consequently, talk to as many people as possible even though this is an exhausting process. 
With this checklist in hand or tucked away in a folder, you should get most of the major information you need to make an intelligent decision. You should be able to give the impression that you are an informed, bright candidate, rather than a naive neophyte -- and you can always keep the conversation flowing, even in the most tension laden situation by just throwing out another question. As the questions are answered, check them off, so as not to omit any vital concerns. Do not hesitate to make copious notes during the interview; with the barrage of facts and figures, notes will prove invaluable during later reflection. 
We have divided the checklist under three headings that seem reasonable: General Information, Teaching, and Research. The purpose of most questions is evident, but not all are of equal importance: some are vital to a decision, others are merely for information. Before turning to the checklist, some general comments are useful. 
Questions on department organization are vital, although most young job candidates tend to ignore this area entirely. The basic thrust of your discrete inquiries should be to see if the faculty trusts the chairperson and upper administration. Find out if she is a tyrant. Is she honest? Weak? Even-handed? Is the department stable or chaotic with warring factions? The answers to such questions will usually determine the psychological health of the department and your chance for development. Do not underestimate the power of a chaotic department or a despotic chairperson to thwart your career. 
Questions on retirement and health seem a nuisance to individuals seeking their first job. These topics should not be neglected as a couple of illustrations should make clear. If you plan to start a family, most health plans will take care of the maternity costs, but only if you are a member of the plan some months before the pregnancy begins. Check on this timing or it can cost you thousands of dollars. Also be aware of the fact that most schools remove part of each pay check and set that aside for your retirement program. Hence, your annual take home pay will be several hundred dollars less than you might expect based upon the salary you will be quoted. Moreover, different schools vary greatly in their contribution to the benefits package. Some institutions chip in benefit funds to social security, health and retirement which is the equivalent to many thousands of extra dollars above their quoted salary. This should be enough to prompt you to check out them benefits package.
On the question of salary: before your interview you should get a good idea about the salaries of academicians nationally. Such information is available from the back issues of the Chronicle of Higher Education. Also ask people at your home institution about starting salaries. If you have this information, you will be better able to respond to a possible salary offer and appreciate what it means compared to the cost of living in the town. Some schools have excellent salaries but the cost of living is terrifically high. Try to talk to other newly hired people at the interview site and find out in general terms if they are happy with the salary. Inquire if the school publishes a list of the salaries of their faculty -- most state schools must do so. Also find out if summer school teaching would be available for additional money and find out if you can supplement your salary from summer grant funds. 
The teaching questions are designed to help you avoid ending up with a monstrous teaching load. Find out what a normal load is: don't only listen to what the administrators and faculty say, but find out what actually happens. Simply ask faculty what they are teaching each semester: find out if they keep up a research program with this load. (Again, don't take their word for it. Look at past and present course schedules. Ask about their research and facilities. Look and see whether their lab is active. Ask for reprints of their latest papers. This should give you the answer.) Check with the other assistant professors in the department and see what their teaching loads are. Answers to such questions will allow you to avoid being overloaded. It is not uncommon to assign new faculty the heaviest teaching schedules. This can be highly detrimental to any research plans and can virtually wipe out your chances for promotion. Similarly, beware of heavy committee assignments, they can kill you. In a university setting with an emphasis on research 
no one, and we repeat, no one will ever take your heavy teaching or committee commitments into account when promotion time comes around and you have an inadequate publication record to show. 
In many schools, especially those that call themselves universities, research is the name of the game. Here, your entire survival in the promotion and tenure race is dependent upon your skill in getting grants, conducting research and publicizing your findings in journals and meetings. If you are going to play in these leagues, you had better know about the written and unwritten rules at your school. The checklist should help you get the answers. You must pay particular attention to recent tenure and promotions decisions and learn why people managed or failed to make it. When you are interviewed be sure and find out if the school can provide you with the time, space and set-up money to run your operation immediately. Extract firm commitments from the chairperson or dean. Do not be misled by vague promises. You must find out how serious your prospective school is about helping you develop a research program. 
Establish if faculty with active research programs have lower teaching loads than those without such programs. If such differential teaching loads do not exist as a department policy, you can be fairly sure that the institution is not dedicated to promoting research. They consider it an extra. Find out if there
are productive young research investigators surviving on the faculty. If not, again this is a sign the institution is not serious about research. Finally, if the department asks you to teach two or more lecture courses per semester, they are not an institution with research as a major goal, regardless of what they say. So if research is important to you, take a hard look at the evidence. 
Throughout the interview process, you and interviewers, especially the chairperson and search committee, will be stepping through a delicate ballet of negotiations. They will be sizing you up and asking about your needs and you will be checking them out. Do not be over eager but be prepared. Bring to the interview a list of major research equipment that you need and the approximate costs. Any chairperson interested in research will get around to asking you about your requirements and it is at this moment you bring out your list. Also, have your space requirements in mind with an estimate of square footage for lab space. Be sure and ask to see the lab space set aside for the new person. It may not really exist as they describe it. During the interview process, perhaps at the end of your visit, the chairperson will probably mention a salary range for new faculty. Realize there is not a great deal of room for negotiation on assistant professor salaries, perhaps $1,000 to 2,000. Where you stand will depend upon your experience and your skill at making them want you. The optimum position from which to negotiate is a situation where you do not need the job or when you are being seriously courted by another institution. If the latter situation exists, be certain and casually mention that you have just returned from another interview. If you have heard a better salary quoted for other schools casually mention this to the chairperson. By all means always indicate if you are involved in negotiations with another school if such is the case.
Be honest in your statements at all times. Be honest about your requirements; be sure you do not underestimate them. Remember this vital point about negotiations: you will never be in a better position to negotiate for time, space and money than before you are hired (assuming the school wants you).
You will not have the same leverage once they have you signed. Also, once they have offered you a position, get everything down in writing. Ask for written clarification of points. If you have trouble getting certain points clears write a letter to the chairperson or dean (depending on whom you are dealing with) writing down your understanding of the offer and ask them if is correct. Remember, keep all correspondence for future reference. Do not reject any other job offer until you have clarified matters with your first choice. Things may not look as good as they seem at first glance. 
Finally, if you are so unfortunate as to not get the job you want, remember this, sometime virtually everyone gets rejected. Although it bruises the ego, one should not consider such apparent failure a serious blemish; we know of one excellent individual who last year was rejected by perhaps 30 schools before being suddenly hired without serious competition at an outstanding school exactly suited for his talents. From the candidate's viewpoint, the most frustrating thing about most such rejections is that one seldom knows the reason for failure. Search committees often have unstated, unvoiced, and even unrealized objectives as they screen candidates' credentials. Their choices, though not capricious, can be erratic and frequently unpredictable depending upon subjective likes and dislikes. Having served on many search committees, we can only say that the faculty often do not know why they make certain choices either. 
ACADEMIC INTERVIEW CHECKLIST 
General Topics
University and Department Organization 
1. How is the university organized? What are the major units and administrators of the school and what are their responsibilities? (i.e., What does theorganizational flow chart look like?) 
2. Is there a university handbook of procedures, policies, guidelines for faculty? 
3. What is the size of the department and how is it organized? Is it a dictatorial or democratic system of government? How are decisions made? 
4. How important are committees to the function of the department? When they make decisions, does the chairperson overrule them? 
5. How often are departmental meetings held? Are decisions made in departmental meetings, i.e., votes taken? 
6. Are there departmental bylaws or procedural guidelines? 
7. Is there an annual report I may have? (Recent changes in departmental policy and trends are listed here.) 
8. Are there recent reports conducted by outside reviewers evaluating the university and department? (If so, get them. They are relatively unbiased and loaded with information.) 
Criteria for Promotion and Tenure 
1. What are the printed and unspoken criteria for promotion and tenure? i.e., What is the relative importance of teaching, research and service?
2. What is the average time in each academic rank? i.e., How long is it before assistant professors are reviewed for promotion and tenure? 
3. What is the nature of the review process?
4. Approximately what percentage of new faculty receive tenure? 
Salary and Benefits 
1. What is the proposed salary? How is it paid: Weekly? Biweekly? Is it paid over 10 or 12 months? 
2. Can grants be used to supplement salary especially in summer? 
3. What is the salary scale for assistant professors? Associate professors? Full professors? 
4. Are individual salary figures published? Where? 
5. What type of retirement program is there? What percentage of the salary goes to retirement? What does the school contribute? 
6. What type of health program exists? What are the costs and benefits? 
7. Is the school unionized? If so, what role does the union play in the university? Is there a union handbook? How strong is the union? What are the union dues? 
8. Are moving costs to the school covered? 
Living Accommodations 
1. Is housing plentiful or is there a shortage in this area? 
2. Where do faculty live? Can I see a typical faculty house? 
3. How do faculty get to work? Walk? Car? Bicycle? Subway? Bus? 
4. How much should I expect to pay to rent or buy a house? (Ads in local newspapers will help answer this question). 
5. What is the cost of living? (Find out costs of standard items such as bread, milk, gas.) 
6. How good are the elementary and secondary schools and daycare centers? Where are they? How much do they cost? 
7. What is the crime rate? Where are the high crime rate areas? 
8. What are the major cultural events inside and outside of the university? Is there Opera? Ballet? Orchestra? Theater? 
9. What outdoor sports exist? Hunting? Tennis? Fishing? Skiing? Boating?
Teaching 
General Questions 
1. How many undergraduates are presently in the department? Are their numbers increasing, decreasing, or stable? 
2. What are the university and departmental requirements for majors? Non-majors? (A university catalogue will help answer the questions.) 
3. Is the school on a quarter or semester system? 
4. What kind of undergraduates come to this school and department? i.e., What is their cultural and educational background? 
5. Where do the undergraduate students go after graduation? Medical school? Graduate school? Jobs? 6. What are the teaching facilities like? Lecture halls? Laboratories? 
7. Are slide projectors, movie projectors, and overhead projectors available? Is there a cost and a budget to cover this? 
8. Is there a film library and a budget to rent film? 
9. How good is the book library? Is it centralized or are there branches located around campus? Open or closed stacks? What is the policy for placing books on reserve? Interlibrary loans? Computer searches? Photocopying articles? 
10. Who does the typing, duplicating and collating of exams? How much lead time is needed? How large is the office staff? 
11. What is the importance of teaching in promotion and tenure cases? 12. Is summer school teaching available for additional income? 
Specific Questions
1. Which courses do I teach each semester or quarter? Will I have a relatively free hand in organizing the courses? 2. How many lectures are involved and which days of the week are they scheduled? 
3. What are the course descriptions for my courses? Are there course outlines from the past? Which books were used? Who taught the courses
previously? How soon must books be ordered? 
4. What types of exams have been given? How many each semester? Who grades tests? What are the general grading guidelines? 
5. What types of students will I teach? Majors? Non-majors? Premeds? Paraprofessionals?
6. How do my courses fit in the overall curriculum? Are my courses required? Are there prerequisites? 
7. How many students will be in each class? Am I involved in a team taught course? If so, how are decisions about text books, lab manuals, exams and
course organization made?
8. Who teaches similar or complementary courses?
9. Can my course commitment change? Who determines this? By what procedure is a change made? 10. What is the teaching load of other faculty? How does mine compare? 
Laboratories
1. Are there labs associated with my courses? 
2. What is my role in these labs? Am I personally involved in teaching labs and organizing them, or is another staff member in charge? 
3. How many labs occur per week and what is their duration? 4. Is there a lab manual or previous lab exercises in existence? 
5. How many support staff are committed to the lab? Are there lab preparators? Graduate or undergraduate teaching assistants? (Talk to these people if at all possible.) 
6. Who sets up the lab physically? 
7. How much supply and equipment money is budgeted for the labs? How soon must the budget be prepared and supplies ordered?
8. How do I get new equipment or repair old?
9. What kind of laboratory teaching space, supply rooms, stockrooms, animal quarters and equipment already exist? 
10. What are the computer facilities for teaching inside and outside of the department? What are the future plans for computer use expansion? 
Research and Graduate Study 
General Questions 
1. What types of research are going on in the department? 
2. What are the department's research strengths and weaknesses? 
3. Is there a plan of research development in the department? What are hiring plans for the future? 
4. Are there animal rooms? Greenhouse facilities? Instrument rooms? Stock rooms? Dark rooms? Environmental chambers? 
5. What types of major equipment (e.g., centrifuges, spectrophotometers, refrigerators, etc.) already exist in the department? How extensive is theircurrent use? Are electron microscope facilities available? How busy is their staff? 
6. How large is the office staff? Do they type grants and papers? What are their priorities in typing? (i.e., When they are overloaded with work, what gets typed first?) How much lead time is needed?
7. Are word processors used in the office and can faculty and students use them? 
8. Is there a research office on campus to help faculty write and develop grants? 
9. Who handles grant book keeping? 
10. How rapidly are purchase orders handled and what is the general process? 
11. Is there a departmental photocopy machine? What is the procedure for photocopying of books and journals? Is there a charge? 
12. Is there a machinery and electrical shop on campus? A photo illustrator? How good are they? How long does it take to get work finished? Is there a charge? 
13. What the library like? Are the key journals for your research present? If you want a new book or journal, will they order it? What is the library photocopy and interlibrary loan service like? What kind of abstract journals does the library carry? Are journals centralized or in different branch libraries? Does the library have computer search systems? 
14. What type of computer facilities exist on campus for research use? 15. Are there different teaching loads for people doing research? 
16. What is the research productivity of other members of the department? (Outside reviews of the department should have this information.) 
17. How important is research in determining tenure and promotion? 
18. Do interdisciplinary programs for research and graduate study exist? 
19. Is outside grant support essential for promotion and tenure? 
20. Is there a graduate program? Masters only? Ph.D.? 
21. Can assistant professors have graduate students? 
22. How many graduate students and postdoctoral fellows are in the department? What is their quality? What are their areas of interest? 
23. Why do graduate students come to this school? Where do they come from? 24. What are the graduate program and requirements like?
25. How are graduate students supported?
26. How do graduate students select research advisors? 
27. Are undergraduates used in the laboratories as research assistants? If so, are they paid or do they work for course credit? 
Specific Questions
1. Am I expected to perform research?
2. Do I have a research lab? How large is it, and what does it look like? 
3. Is the size of my lab set for all time, or is there a chance for expansion or construction? How and by whom is the space allocated? 
4. If I need animals, who pays for animal care? Are there animal caretakers? 
5. How much set-up money do I get? Will someone advise me what equipment is already available to avoid duplication and ensure that my money will go as far as possible? 
6. Is there annual or occasional financial support for research and supplies? 
7. Are there local institutional grant funds available? How large are these? What are the criteria for selection? Are new people more likely to get these? How often can these be obtained? When are the deadlines? 
8. Is there department or university money for meetings and trips for faculty and students? How much can be awarded? How frequently? What are the criteria for selection? 
9. Who is on campus or nearby with whom I might collaborate? What kind of equipment do they have that I might borrow? Is there a general willingness to share equipment, especially those items I need to borrow initially? 
10. Will my teaching commitments give me time to do research?
11. If I do not get a grant immediately, can I supervise graduate students? 
12. Is this a new position? If not, why did the previous incumbent leave? Will his/her equipment be left for my use in the lab or has it been promised to others? (i.e., is "What I see, what I'll get?" 
Final Question
How soon can expect to hear a decision about my appointment?

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
A Magic Guide to Interviewing for the Job You'll Luv

ON THE INTERVIEW PROCESS ITSELF

The Unwritten Rules:
1. When departments hire they have unrealistic expectations.   They want creative 
productive scientists, great personalities, brilliant conversationalists, selfless colleagues, 
etc.  During an interview, you turn on like a lightbulb and shine as brightly as possible.  
There can be no lapses in conversation -- everything you say should be clever, original, 
insightful, and mature.   On the other hand...do not talk too much...you have to listen as 
well as blab...and not give the impression of someone so caught up with their own 
cleverness that they never let anyone else get in a word.

2. Not only must you shine like a bulb, but you also need to change colors at an instant. 
Every faculty member wants to get someone fun and special For Themselves. This brings 
up the second fundamental rule: you must be yourself, but you must try to exhibit as many 
of your very own multiple personalities as you can. When talking to people during an 
interview, it is natural to concentrate on the research you've spent the most time at, but 
this is also what you will talk about in your seminar and thus what everyone will know. 
Before the interview starts, it is essential to review all the Other Interests you have -- side 
projects, current work, things you are just fascinated in and have vaguely thought of doing 
in the future. Bring them out as they fit in with the interests of those you are talking to, so 
that you show as many sides of yourself as you can.

3. Any single faculty member's opinion may win you the job, or kill your chances.  This 
single fact is well-worth remembering. It implies several things:-- don't just try to be 
appealing to the ecologists in the department; molecular biologists, developmental 
specialists, etcetera must also want you. This is the hardest part of interviewing (Doak's 
opinion): trying to be interesting to and interested in someone with whom you actually 
have little or nothing in common. Worse, these people will themselves usually be bored 
and restless when they talk to you. HOWEVER, this is precisely why the points you score 
with people far from your field can get you so far -- most of the other schmucks 
interviewing will not even try to have fun with these folks, so your efforts will really count.-- 
Since virtually all academics are self-centered pricks, ask sincere and interesting 
questions about each faculty member's (and graduate student's) own work; don't just talk 
about your own.

--  But finally, much of what each person thinks of you will have more to do with the state of 
their constipation that it does with anything you do or say -- don't get strung out about it. 
Also, Don't Ever Give Up on someone's opinion. You need to realize that you will have no 
ability to judge how someone will rate you versus other candidates. Even if the old fart you 
are talking with falls asleep after 5 minutes, he may vote for you if you are start asking 
interesting questions again when he walks up.




PREPARATION
So, some people are full of bs, and all this comes naturally...with no preparation.  That is 
the exception. Thus, here are some of the simple ways to prepare:

1. KNOWING YOUR FUTURE COLLEAGUES
For most of us it pays to do some research and read or skim a few papers of each of the 
faculty in the department at which you will interview (or minimally the search committee). 
The important thing here is to be able to ask one or two leading questions that show to 
each and every person that you are Interested in Them.

2. QUESTIONS YOU SHOULD ASK CHAIRS, DEANS, AND SOME INDIVIDUAL 
FACULTY (and examples of how to sound like you have some sort of experience or 
originality)
The banal question: Is there money to bring in seminar speakers?
The correct version: If I wanted to teach an interdisciplinary course on ecology and 
economics (or just pick any field not well-represented in this department), could I get 
money to bring in 2-3 speakers in a semester who would address some of the themes of 
the course?

The banal question: what support is there for teaching courses?
The correct version:  if I teach a special field ecology course, can I purchase modest 
pieces of equipment such as field balances, GPS units etc...that could serve the course as 
well as researchers for years?

The banal question:  what is the teaching load?
The correct version:  for my research, it would be best if I doubled up in some quarters or 
semesters, to free up time to focus on research during portions of the field season, what 
are my options for such teaching flexibility?

The banal question: How much space will I get?
The right question: I plan to conduct a combination of lab work, field experiments, and 
computer-intensive modeling. How much space could I expect for my lab computer  
facilities, and how much to house my grad students? Also, will I have access to 
pre-existing growth chambers and greenhouse space? [if the answer is no: If i came i'd be 
very interested in taking the lead on an institutional equipment grant to build more 
chambers if other people in the dept are interested....]

The banal question:  how well do faculty get along and cooperate among departments?
The correct version:  has the department ever been involved in a multi-department training 
grant proposal?
The banal question: what are computer facilities like?
The correct question:   I am interested in using several computer labs in my course on 
______.  What sort of computer facilities are available for that type of instruction?

The banal question: what are class size here? The correct question: I enjoy lecturing to big 
classes and have some experience doing that. But I also think that students need to take at 
least some very small classes in order to really learn research ideas and methods. Can I 
create a mix of one big lecture course and some quite small advanced classes so that I 
teach both styles of class each year?
do you get the idea....here are other questions:

When graduate students are recruited, if I were a new faculty member would I get any 
special help in either recruiting or admitting students ? I would like to get 2-3 students 
quickly...both to get my program underway, and so they'd have one another to interact 
with.

Obviously, research, teaching and service are part of the tenure decision. I have two 
concerns about the type of research I do. My fieldwork can take 2-3 years before it bears 
fruitful results -- is the publication record of field biologists judged by their standards...and 
not by the standards of molecular biologists?  Secondly, with funding increasingly scarce, 
I intend to go after some pretty untraditional sources ( DOE, TNC etc.) -- is their any prejudice against funding that does not come from NIH or NSF?

For the development of new courses such as .....(have some special creative idea 
here)...can faculty get some course relief in order to develop new courses?

Is there university or department funding for new faculty to help them collect pilot data for 
grants they will then submit to NSF or NIH?


QUESTIONS TO ASK INDIVIDUAL FACULTY
1. What is your biggest frustration here?

2. What are the best features of a position here compared to other colleges or universities?

3. Ask the same questions of graduate students...and even undergraduates -- they will be 
flattered you take an interest

4. Are the teaching assistantships so time-consuming that it is impossible for grad students 
to get research done while teaching?  Who decides on t.a. assignments? and is there any 
attempt to be fair ?  (ask these questions of both faculty and grad students).

5. What sources of fellowship or research cost moneys are there for grad students? Also, I was pushed to learn grant-writing skills and would want to do that for my students: how many students in the department get NSF Dissertation Awards or similar outside money?

6. What are the hiring priorities for future faculty? It seems like there are few XX biologists 
in the department -- is that perceived as a problem?7. Is there any reward for involving 
undergrads in research? and any resources to help with this enterprise? I have a couple 
ideas for projects in which I hope to involve undergrads...


3. GENERAL PREPARATION TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
First of all, review the materials you sent to apply for the job. Commit to memory the 
courses you said you'd love to teach, the research you said was in preparation, etc... Few 
people will actually bother to look carefully at what you wrote, but some will. You have to 
be prepared for their follow-up questions. The other major task is to read through the 
following list and have a set of thoughts about how to answer them. Notice that we Didn't 
say 'a set of answers committed to memory.' Part of shining in an interview is appearing 
spontaneous, rather than giving rout answers that are obviously 'canned.' Practice 
answering these questions in different forms from your friends so that you can think about 
them as well as just have a pat answer. Finally, check out the geography of the place you 
are going. If you are a field biologist, have in mind several possible field sites, or at least 
local communities that you would be interested in working in. This will allow you to ask 
intelligent questions that show a real interest in the job ('Subalpine meadows are a 
community that would be ideal for my studies of tardigrade competition; how long does it 
take to get into the mountains, and where are there protected areas for field experiments?')


4.QUESTIONS YOU SHOULD BE PREPARED TO ANSWER (with imagination and 
confidence)
1. What research will you be doing when you show up here ?

2. Will you work around here? [right answer: yes, i plan to start some projects around here 
quickly while wrapping up or continuing my work elsewhere]

3. Why would you want to come here?

4. What teaching would you like to do?

5. What is your philosophy of graduate student training ? how will you support the 
students, what type of projects do you expect them to work on?

6. What do you contribute to the department that is not already well covered by the 
faculty?

7. Where do you expect to get funding?

8. What makes you think you could ever get any outside funding? What is the best idea you ever had?[these last two are actual questions asked of Doak on his interview, in 
exactly this form]

10. What projects will you start next?

11. What do you do? [many faculty you meet will know nothing about you -- having never 
read the files -- and this will be their first question. Have a snappy 3-5 minute answer that 
will make them want to ask more]

12. Where do you see your work going in the next 10 to 20 years? [lots of pricks actually 
ask this stupid question, so have a nice, clean answer that invokes a some 'big ideas' and 
'big problems' in your field]

13. So...yawn...what questions do you have for me??? [see below]

5. MEETING WITH THE GRAD STUDENTS
There are only a few simple rules. First, be prepared as described above. Next, ask the 
following:

1. What do you all do? (ask this first, no matter how many students are there -- they will 
make it quick and they will love it that you ask. Also, try to refer to some of their research 
topics when asking and answering other questions)

2. What do you want in a new person?

3. What is lacking in the dept?

4. It seems to me that for some of you it would be really helpful to have a faculty member 
who does X (what you do and no one else does), and that that is a real gap that I fill. How many of you would be interested in seminars or reading groups on this topic? What other things could I offer that would be esp helpful?
Ask other questions as above.

6. WHAT TO BRING
Whether you wear shoes or not is your decision, but there is one simple thing that 
everyone should take to an interview: a notebook. In it should be:

1. your schedule. the faculty will loose their copies, so by having yours, you appear 
competent.

2. lists of questions to ask. Every time you go to the bathroom or are left alone for a second or two, take a look. It is a way of reminding yourself what you actually want to know, as well as of good things to ask to fill time.

You should also write things down in your notebook. Do not act like a newspaper reporter, 
but if you ask detailed questions (e.g 'what is start-up' and 'how much greenhouse space'),  writing down the answer helps you to remember and shows you really want to know.

7. FINAL WORDS
 The first and final thing to remember is: you don't need their stinking job anyway, so have 
fun! Especially after reviewing all the stuff above, you may feel that interviewing is an insurmountable hurtle. Not so; the advice above is simple, as is the preparation. 
Furthermore, it is all just increasing your odds -- you can fuck up many parts of an interview and still get the job. Maintaining a sense of fun is especially important, because seeming as though you are enjoying yourself is a big part of 'shining' and it is hard to fake. 
Basically, you are acting out a part for the interview. The character is you, but a you that is well-rehearsed and enjoying yourself.